Introduction
Nicodemus was not like the other Pharisees who interacted with Jesus. Jesus treated him differently. He was neither short nor dismissive with him. In many ways, Nicodemus had the pedigree to be an influential teacher. He had knowledge of the Old Testament and was respected as a teacher and religious leader. However, he had one huge flaw: he was trained in the traditions of religious leaders known for being self-absorbed. Nicodemus was different because he showed that he was unbiased and fair; his compassion proved that his heart was not completely hardened. Jesus knew and understood him in that it would take a harsh reprimand to shake the foundations of his self-confidence.
Jesus confronted Nicodemus with the truth that regeneration by the Holy Spirit is required to enter God's Kingdom. His message of salvation to Nicodemus was critically important and clarified the fundamental aspects of redemption. Jesus became Nicodemus' teacher and explained how to be saved and know God. Theologians spent centuries discussing Jesus' statements. Given this complexity, what chance did Nicodemus have of understanding? Did God move his heart to accept Jesus as his teacher and grasp the truth?
Central Idea and Outline
CIT: Jesus confronted Nicodemus with the truth that regeneration by the Holy Spirit is required to enter God's Kingdom.
Historical Context
The four Gospels paralleled the history of God incarnate. This period was influenced by three historical and political factors. First, the Romans occupied Israel and many of the surrounding regions. Second, the religious nation of Isreal, including the Sadducees, Pharisees, and Sanhedrin, was allowed to operate under the supervision of the Roman governor (Pilate). Third, the Second Temple was in its most glorious state. It was the central hub for political and religious influence. John's Gospel is unique in comparison to the other Gospels. It highlights Jesus as the Messiah, the Son of God, and the bringer of salvation. John MacArthur wrote about the book of John, "Reinforcing the evangelistic purpose is the fact that the word 'believe' occurs approximately 100 times in the gospel (the synoptics use the term less than half as much)."
John chapter 3 encapsulated many of the key concepts of the book into one interaction with Nicodemus, a Pharisee and member of the Sanhedrin. The challenge that Jesus gave Nicodemus was to believe that one must be born again of the Spirit to enter the kingdom of God (John 3:12). Jesus' actions at the Temple caused a rift between Himself and the religious leaders, setting a tone for His interaction with Nicodemus and influencing every interaction that He had with the Jewish leaders thereafter. In these actions, God orchestrated the conflict to position them to carry out His crucifixion.
Biblical Context
The scene in John chapter 3 is established within the context of the preceding chapter. Four of Jesus' disciples start to follow Him before the beginning of His public ministry. They followed Him into Jerusalem. From John's account, "The Passover of the Jews was at hand, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem" (John 2:13). Jesus entered the temple, "And making a whip of cords, he drove them all out of the temple, with the sheep and oxen. And he poured out the coins of the money-changers and overturned their tables" (John 2:15). Spurgeon said, "The temple had been transformed into a den of trade-a place where the priests had lined their pockets ... They were incensed not merely at the defilement of the temple but at the loss of their ill-gotten gains." At the start of Jesus' public ministry, the Jewish leaders were conflicted with Him. Jesus' popularity incited them further. John's Gospel explains, "Now when he was in Jerusalem at the Passover Feast, many believed in his name when they saw the signs that he was doing" (John 2:23). Jesus' popularity at this occasion resulted in His disciples baptizing more people than John the Baptist. When the Pharisees learned about Jesus' popularity, it caused Jesus to leave Jerusalem for Galilee (John 4:1-2). Jesus' defiance of the Jewish leaders' role in the temple was seen as a sign of Jesus' authority, and they took His actions as a direct assault on their leadership.
Nicodemus Approached Jesus John 3:1-2
Nicodemus was a Pharisee, teacher, and a member of the Sanhedrin. "He was a ruler of the Jews, a member of the great sanhedrim, a senator, a privy-counsellor, a man of authority in Jerusalem...who yet could do little good because the stream was so strong against them; they were over-ruled by the majority, and yoked with those that were corrupt." Besides Nicodemus' political and teaching accomplishments, he also showed his character in the two other passages that he was mentioned. First in John 7:50-52, Nicodemus challenged the Jewish leaders during a meeting of the Sanhedrin when they were judging Jesus. He reminded them that the law required that a person should be heard before being judged. His intervention shows that he would challenge his cohorts even if it meant being ridiculed. They mocked him asking if he was from Galilee. Second in John 19:39-42 after the crucifixion, Nicodemus brought myrrh and aloes to prepare Jesus for His burial. This was risky for him because showing compassion towards Jesus meant defying the High Priest and Sanhedrin, who had judged Jesus as a blasphemer. His reaction showed that Nicodemus had a degree of character and that his words could be taken as sincere.
Nicodemus came to Jesus at night so that he could speak to Jesus privately to discover more about Him. The Scripture says, "This man came to Jesus by night and said to him, 'Rabbi, we know that you are a teacher come from God, for no one can do these signs that you do unless God is with him'" (John 3:2). The word "we" shows that Nicodemus is speaking to Jesus as a representative of the council. While his assessment of Jesus is theoretically correct, Jesus knew that in his heart Nicodemus was wrong because he was not recognizing Jesus as the Messiah. So, as much as Nicodemus showed character and understanding, he was not accurately understanding with whom he was conversing.
Jesus Challenged Nicodemus John 3:3-4
"Jesus answered him, "Truly, truly, I say to you, unless one is born again he cannot see the kingdom of God" (John 3:3). Jesus directly addressed the problem that Nicodemus needed to solve. Jesus did not confirm or rebuke Nicodemus' statement directly, but instead, captured his attention by starting out with the words "Truly, truly". R.C. Sproul in his exposition of John 3 emphasizes the emphatic nature of Jesus' statement to Nicodemus, "The sense here is that Jesus was stressing the absolute certainty of the words He was about to utter. Jesus said, in effect, 'Mark this carefully, Nicodemus what I'm about to tell you is the unvarnished truth.'" This was such an abrupt and direct statement. It is counterintuitive that this was an evangelical message. Instead of offering a patient and compassionate message, Jesus antagonized his understanding of God. Nicodemus would have understood that Jesus was challenging his understanding of His purpose and identity. Recognizing the use of a metaphor, he struck back in-kind thinking that he was matching Jesus' whit, "Nicodemus said to him, 'How can a man be born when he is old? Can he enter a second time into his mother's womb and be born?'" (John 3:4). Nicodemus implied that he was established and therefore did not need to be born again.
Jesus Explained in Detail John 3:5-8
Now that Jesus had Nicodemus' attention, He gave him one of the most important messages. Jesus explained regeneration to him. Why would He have given such an important message to a member of the Sanhedrin who belonged to the counsel that was going to pass a capital punishment judgment on Him? Jesus did not give this message to his twelve disciples this directly at this point. He explained that one must be born of water and Spirit (John3:5). In the book of Ezekiel both concepts of water and Spirit are explained. Ezekiel wrote, "I will sprinkle clean water on you, and you shall be clean from all your uncleannesses, and from all your idols I will cleanse you. And I will give you a new heart, and a new spirit I will put within you. And I will remove the heart of stone from your flesh and give you a heart of flesh" (Ezekiel 36:25-26). The ESV Expository Commentary explains Ezekiel,
[Ezekiel] 36:24-32 Yet the Lord cannot satisfy his honor merely by regathering Israel to her homeland, unchanged. Bringing the people home is certainly the initial step (v. 24), but they must also be transformed. First, they are to be sprinkled with clean water, washing away their defilement and cleansing them from their deep attachment to idols (v. 25; cf. Num. 19:18-19). Already this is clearly much more than an external ritual; it means nothing less than receiving a new heart and a new spirit. "Heart" and "spirit" are here more or less synonymous, describing the inner person, the seat of thoughts, will, and emotions (cf. Ex. 4:21; Deut. 2:30; Ezek. 21:7). Such a radical transformation was promised already in Ezekiel 11:19 (cf. 18:31).
In John 3:8, Jesus uses a play on the Greek work πνεῦμα (pneuma), which the meaning is wind, breath, or spirit. The word origin is derived from the root verb πνέω (pneō) which means to 'breathe' or 'to blow' (Strongs G4151). Jesus was using the wind as an analogy for the Spirit. The Spirit is hidden like the wind, but it has a physical impact on the world. Joel wrote, "And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out my Spirit on all flesh; your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, your old men shall dream dreams, and your young men shall see visions" (Joel 2:28). The Spirit manifests in the flesh to prophesy and to witness (Acts 1:8). All are born of flesh, but those who are born of Spirit display the manifestation of the Spirit (1 Corinthians 12:7).
Israel's Teacher Wrestled with the Truth John 3:9-10
"Nicodemus said to him, 'How can these things be?'" (John 3:9). Jesus criticized him for not understanding the concepts of regeneration even though he was a teacher of Israel (John 3:10). The idea of regeneration was explained in Ezekiel 36:25-26. As a teacher of the Old Testament, Nicodemus should have understood the idea of regeneration, but in his defense, he did not have a proper teacher to help him understand the true nature of God's grace. God's grace is that He alone is solely responsible for salvation (Ephesians 2:8-9). Jesus accused the Pharisees of believing themselves to be righteous based on their own effort (Luke 18: 9). This concept of self-reliance would have been the type of training that Nicodemus received. Jesus saw in his heart the capability to learn grace and not be like the proselyte of the Pharisee who was taught the way to hell (Matthew 23:15).
Jesus Broke Stubborn Resistance John 3:11-12
Jesus continued teaching Nicodemus this hard lesson by again making the emphatic "Truly, truly" statement. He was telling Nicodemus to listen carefully to the next statement of absolute certainty, "Truly, truly, I say to you, we speak of what we know, and bear witness to what we have seen, but you do not receive our testimony. If I have told you earthly things and you do not believe, how can you believe if I tell you heavenly things" (John 3:11-12)? Jesus provides a legal testimony satisfying the requirements of Deuteronomy 19:15 that more than one witness was required to establish facts by changing from singular to "we" plural. The other witnesses are John the Baptist, the prophets, the Father, and the Holy Spirit. There could be no mistake that Jesus was saying that you must accept my statement of regeneration if you are going to accept me. Jesus was paralleling Nicodemus statement in John 3:2 when Nicodemus said, "We know that you are a teacher come from God" with His own statement "We speak of what we know". Jesus was explaining to Nicodemus that he was speaking about things that he did not understand.
Jesus continued in verse 12 to instruct Nicodemus, referring to the earthly things of a new birth in the Spirit, and the heavenly things that He continued to explain in the next verses. Jesus' asking "How can you believe if I tell you heavenly things" is an instruction to him that he must let go of his presuppositions and open his mind to divine truth. This continuation shows that Jesus is instructing Nicodemus, essentially becoming his teacher. Jesus planted the seeds of salvation that he specifically needed. In many other interactions with the Jewish leaders, Jesus does not take on this instructor role or guide them towards a correct perspective. Jesus criticized and rejected the Pharisees in several instances for elevating their traditions over God's commands (Mark 7:1-13), interpreting His miracles incorrectly (Mark 8:11-13), valuing the Sabbath over mercy (Luke 13:10-17), calling them children of the devil (John 8:44), and for demanding signs (Matthew 12:1-8 and 12:38-42), among other reasons.
Nicodemus is not mentioned again in this interaction leaving the question of his salvation without an answer. Other mentions of him in John's Gospel showed him as being favorable towards Jesus, leading to a belief that he ultimately came to faith.
Even though this interaction was isolated to Nicodemus, the concepts of rebirth in God are echoed throughout the New Testament. Paul reinforces this teaching on salvation by writing, "he saved us, not because of works done by us in righteousness, but according to his own mercy, by the washing of regeneration and renewal of the Holy Spirit" (Titus 3:5).
Theological Significance
The concept of regeneration by the Holy Spirit is the cornerstone of grace. This perspective places the work of salvation in God's hands. It is ridiculous that a baby could take credit for being born in the flesh; it is just as ridiculous that a person could take credit for being born in the Spirit. John's Gospel states, "But to all who did receive him, who believed in his name, he gave the right to become children of God, who were born, not of blood nor of the will of the flesh nor of the will of man, but of God" (John 1:12-13). This concept of salvation being God's work was originated in the Old Testament. In Isaiah, he described waiting for God to bring salvation (Isaiah 25:9). The same sentiment is stated in Jonah 2:9.
Regeneration before salvation is the only way we can respond to God's call. Without the Spirit, we cannot know God. Paul says, "The natural person does not accept the things of the Spirit of God, for they are folly to him, and he is not able to understand them because they are spiritually discerned" (1 Corinthians 2:14). The timing of regeneration and accepting faith is a mystery and may not be discernible. It is best described in Lydia's case that God open her heart to pay attention to Paul (Acts 16:4). Without God's work of opening her heart, the message would have not touched her heart.
Regeneration helps define the basis for our relationship with God after salvation. The new birth of the Spirit in us provides the source and definition of our holy work. Paul explains, "Or do you not know that your body is a temple of the Holy Spirit within you, whom you have from God? You are not your own, for you were bought with a price. So glorify God in your body" (1 Corinthians 6:19-20). The presence of the Spirit being born in us is the source of the power to bring God glory, "If you know that he is righteous, you may be sure that everyone who practices righteousness has been born of him" (1 John 2:29). While in 1 John 5:18, we see that those born of God do not continue in sin. These verses present two sides of the same truth: being born of God results in both the removal of sin and the practice of righteousness. Our faith, holiness, and forgiveness are wholly dependent on us being born of the Spirit.
Bibliography
ESV Expository Commentary Ezekiel-36:16-38. n.d. https://www.esv.org/resources/esv-expository-commentary/ezekiel-36-16-36-38/ (accessed February 17, 2025).
ESV Expository Commentary John 3:1-21. n.d. https://www.esv.org/resources/esv-expository-commentary/n43003001-43003021-john-31-21/ (accessed February 17, 2025).
Gleason L., Archer Jr. New International Encyclopedia of Bible Difficulties. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2001.
Grudem, Wayne. "Regeneration." In Systematic Theology, 2nd ed, 850-860. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan Academic, 2020.
Henry, Matthew. John 3 In Matthew Henry's Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible. 1706. https://www.christianity.com/bible/commentary/matthew-henry-complete/john/3 (accessed February 13, 2025).
Kittel, Gerhard ed. Theological Dictionary of the New Testament. Grand Rapids: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co, 1964-1976.
Longman, Tremper III., and David E. Garland, eds. The Expositor's Bible Commentary. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2008.
MacArthur, John. The MacArthur Bible Handbook. Nashville, TN: Thomas Nelson, 2003.
Renn, Stephen D. ed. Expository Dictionary of Bible Words. Peabody, MA: Hendrickson Publishers Marketing, 2005.
Sproul, R.C. John (St. Andrew's Expositional Commentary) . Lake Mary, FL: Reformation Trust Publishing, 2009.
Spurgeon, Charles Haddon. Jesus Angry with Hard Hearts. March 28, 1886. https://www.spurgeongems.org/sermon/chs1893.pdf (accessed February 13, 2025).
Strong's Exhaustive Concordance. n.d. https://biblehub.com/strongs.htm (accessed February 16, 2025).
Walvoord, John F., and Roy B. Zuck, eds. The Bible Knowledge Commentary. Colorado Springs, CO: David C Cook, 1983.
