The author provided a coherent overarching theological message of the Torah. The arrangement of ideas shows a unifying message within these five books and is a fitting introduction to God's purposes and plans for drawing near to humanity. A clear case is made that the historical readers understood that the beginning exposition not only provided a setting but also anticipated a conclusion.
While the author provided all the material for the unifying message, the overall summary of the message could have been more distinctly stated for the reader with a summary of the theological sections of each chapter.
There are a few theological points that a reader of the Pentateuch can easily miss from the narration. The author provides insight into these points. First, the state of Adam and Eve before the fall was that of holy image bearers of God who had authority and dominion over God's creation. They executed this authority under provision and submission to God. This is the state to which humanity desires to return and be restored to after the fall. Second, from this state of loss, an anticipated savior is promised in the form of a kingdom and more importantly in the form of a man-lion king. The author concludes, "In the promise to Abraham, the [biblical] author makes the point that the seed the reader is to await is indeed a human descendant, born from the "bowels" of Abraham... one who is himself the very "image of God," whom the author also awaits. The dual nature of Christ is consistent with these early chapters of Genesis that project hope in God's promise to Abraham and his seed." (p. 124)
Another area that helps focus the complex unity of the Torah is the section on Moses. His history is a complex culmination of events. In Moses, the foreshadowing of God's final plan can be seen.  First is the need for a mediator between humanity and God. The people saw that they could not approach God because of fear of His glory and greatness. Second, God is both transcendent and imminent in His deliverance. God spoke to them from the top of the mountain and the people saw God ascending into the clouds. In contrast, God tabernacles with His people, leading them through the wilderness to receive His commands and instructing them to build a mobile temple. Third, humanity needs a savior from slavery that requires God's power and intercession. (p. 139) It was obvious that the people could only credit their deliverance to God's miracles. In Moses, God unfolds how He relates to His people as a holy and relational God and how God wants His people to relate to Him in atonement and humility seeking forgiveness.
When reading the history of Israel, it is sometimes difficult to realize that they were unable to adhere to God's plan and law. It was not that God's law of grace and worldwide evangelism was not provided until the New Testament but that without Christ they were unable to satisfy God's mission. The author shows that God provides hope in Deuteronomy to give humanity a circumcised heart. The author explains, "God will someday take action on an individual's heart-regardless of gender, social class, and nationality-so that they can obey with their full being and live faithfully in the land." (p. 166)
In addition to the unifying message, the author provides the answer to people's most important question: What is our purpose? "Exodus 9:16 indicates most clearly his desire: 'But for this purpose I have raised you up, to cause you to see my glory, and in order to proclaim my name in all the earth.' No fewer than twelve times we read that the LORD is doing this so that Israel, Egypt, and future generations will know that he is YHWH. God has a desire that his glory be known to all people through both judgment and salvation." (p. 139) This is the most important message that impacts how we understand the Bible in context. The author points out, "The end of Deuteronomy speaks of a time when the LORD will embrace those from all nations as his covenant people. This should not surprise us." (p. 179) The impact on the world is also promised in the covenant with Abraham that the world would be blessed through him. God's mission is consistent through the Bible. While a little harder to realize, God's mission is the same in the Pentateuch. God desires His people to proclaim His glory to all the people in the world to bring them to Himself.
One approach that is helpful to delve into is the idea of what the Torah is not. The idea that is most damaging is stated by the author, "We treat the narratives like a history lesson and try to draw good or bad morals from it." (p. 35) People will go to their devotional time and find the checklist of life. They miss the relational and pursuing factors of God's efforts. In every case, God is exercising His will on the covenantal figures. Morality is a natural state of God's work and meant to be admired but not at the cost of losing the missional relationship between God and His people. Second, the author states, "We should also not assume that the author intended the book exclusively, or even primarily, for the second generation of Israelites who came out of Egypt." (p. 35) This statement forces contemplation of the purposes and unifying factors that precede the Pentateuch, moving the text in the mind of the reader further beyond just a historical account. Third, people place focus on the natural factor of the creation story, challenging the natural sciences, but the author challenges this concept, "[The Gen. 1] chapter is about more than just creation or science. ... The Pentateuch's author apparently does not find the subject important enough to return to often or place these arguments in prominent positions throughout his book." (p. 65) This statement is helpful in moving the focus to God's intentions in relationship to people. The setting is important in the understanding that God is provisioning for the needs of the people and that we live in a world that God has placed us in, not one we created by our own efforts.
The author provides logic that the Pentateuch is for a future generation by stating, "The book is about the future, not merely the past. In fact, most scholars think that the Pentateuch stems from a hand later than Moses. If this is correct, then the book was obviously not intended for an audience at that early period." (p. 35) This passive statement is not needed since the Torah's future impact and relevance is displayed at more than one point in time. It is most impactfully stated in Jesus' statement, "...These are my words that I spoke to you while I was still with you, that everything written about me in the Law of Moses and the Prophets and the Psalms must be fulfilled." (Luke 24:44 ESV)
The conclusion that is anticipated is shown in the statement, "...the end of the days. The Pentateuch has already described this time frame as the time during which the law-giving lion king from the tribe of Judah will come, and the obedience of the nations will be his (Gen. 49:1, 10; Num. 24:7-9, 16-19; Deut. 33:21)." (p. 169) This concise statement can be seen in Jesus and is a clear sign of His coming being foretold in the Pentateuch as the hope of the nations.
